Plot
Field Trip

Percy Jackson is a twelve year old boy diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia, and he has been expelled from every school he has ever attended. While he is in sixth grade on a field trip,[1] a classmate of his, Nancy Bobofit, bullies his best friend Grover Underwood. Percy is outraged, and suddenly, water from a nearby fountain drenches Nancy in a very unnatural way but the Mist makes it look like Percy pushed her. Their pre-algebra teacher, Mrs. Dodds, takes Percy for a private talk, presumably to scold him. However, she suddenly turns into a Fury, a mythical creature known from Greek mythology, and tries to kill him. The Latin teacher, Mr. Brunner, charges in and throws Percy a pen that suddenly changes into a sword when he uncaps it. Percy kills the Fury in self-defense.

For the rest of the year, everyone in the campus thinks that Mrs. Dodds had never existed, and their pre-algebra teacher is Mrs. Kerr, a teacher he has never once seen before. Percy, however, suspects that something is going on since whenever he asks Grover, he hesitates. Percy is almost led to believe this, too, until he eavesdrops on Grover and Mr. Brunner saying otherwise. On his way home for the summer, he sees three very old women knitting, who turn out to be the Fates, cut a line of string, and Grover tells him this is worse than it really seems. He explains to Percy that the Fates are the ones who decide the lifespan of a being. The string in their hand is the lifeline of a person and when cut, it signifies the person's death. Percy is very frightened by this and assumes that the string of yarn that had just been cut off was his. When they make it into Manhattan, Percy ditches Grover who has to go to the restroom.

Percy comes home to his mother, Sally Jackson. She tells him that, as a treat, they would get to go on a vacation to Montauk for a couple of days, and that they are to leave immediately. Though they run into some complications, namely Percy's stepfather, Gabe Ugliano, they are able to leave for their destination.

Grover urgently comes to Montauk and tells Percy's mother that Percy must flee to a specific camp, Camp Half-Blood. Sally drives the two kids to camp using Gabe's car. Inside the car, Percy discovers that his mother and Grover are familiar with one another; he also notices that Grover is a goat from the waist down. As they travel closer to the camp, they are attacked by the Minotaur. While trapped inside the car, Sally then tells Percy to escape and run for the tree, but Percy disagrees and tells her that he is not leaving her behind. Leaving her no choice, Sally helps Percy with Grover as they run for the pine tree marking the borders of camp. However, Percy's mom could no longer go further and continues to distract the Minotaur, but it immediately grabs her and she dissolves into a golden shower of light.

Seeing this, Percy grows angry and charges towards the Minotaur. He is able to grab its horn and stabs it, causing the monster to crumble into dust. He walks to the camp's borders with Grover before he collapses on the porch in front of a man and a girl.

Camp Half-Blood
Percy weaves in and out of consciousness, and when he is conscious, he sees the girl he had seen before tending to him. When he comes to for good, Grover gives him back the Minotaur horn and takes him to the man he had seen earlier. He finds out that the man is Mr. Brunner and is told that everything he had learned in Greek mythology is true. He is introduced to Mr. D, who is really the god Dionysus, and Mr. Brunner reveals himself to be the centaur Chiron. Chiron hands him over to the girl who took care of him while he was unconscious, a girl named Annabeth Chase, and she then gives him a tour of the camp and explains in detail their identity as demigods. He is taken to the Hermes Cabin, where all the undetermined half-bloods are assigned to stay, and is introduced to the head counselor, Luke Castellan.

They are interrupted by Clarisse La Rue, a girl from the Ares cabin, as she tries to shove his head in a toilet as part of an initiation ceremony, but the plan backfires as the water arcs over his head and onto her and her friends, pushing them out the bathroom.

Percy prepares for his new life as a demigod. During a Capture the Flag game, Ares campers attack him, all wanting revenge for what he had done to Clarisse. Clarisse stabs him with her electric spear but he steps in the creek and gains the upper hand. He breaks Clarisse's spear and defeats his other rivals. Just as he defeats all of the campers, Luke crosses the line with the enemy flag and wins the game. Amidst the celebration, Annabeth notices Percy's wound as he stays in the water, which seems to be healing. She asks Percy to step out of the water and Percy soon feels weakened.

Annabeth jumps to the conclusion of who his father may be. Suddenly, a hellhound attacks Percy, wounding the demigod. Chiron kills the hellhound and Annabeth shows Chiron what happens when Percy is in the water. Percy is claimed as a son of Poseidon through a hologram of green light in the form of a trident.

This is a surprise to many as it is revealed that the three elder gods — Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades — have taken an oath to never have demigod children again. Percy's appearance, a clear sign that Poseidon has broken the oath, can only mean strange and obscure events for the future.

Percy is granted a quest to find Zeus' Master Bolt, which Chiron believes Hades has stolen. However, Zeus discovers Poseidon's broken oath and believes Percy stole the bolt. Percy has ten days before the Summer Solstice to find the symbol of power of the king of gods, and he is given magic shoes as a "gift" from Luke before leaving. However, Chiron tells him that it is a bad idea to use the shoes since Zeus might blast him out of the sky, so he gives them to Grover. Chiron hands over a pen to Percy, informing him that it is a gift from his father. When uncapped, a sword, called Riptide or Anaklusmos, appears. Percy, accompanied by Annabeth and Grover, travels to western Long Island, leading them closer to the Underworld in Los Angeles.