Plot
Westover Hall
In December, six months after the Sea of Monsters adventure, Percy Jackson, Thalia Grace and Annabeth Chase go to Westover Hall to meet Grover Underwood, who had found two powerful demigod siblings there, Bianca and Nico di Angelo. Thalia displays the ability to manipulate the Mist and tries to convince a resident teacher and the vice-principal there that the three belong to the school. The teacher is easily tricked but the vice-principal, who was actually a manticore in disguise wasn't tricked. Thalia manages to not let the three get kicked out before they could find Grover.

Grover soon informs them that Dr. Thorn, the vice-principal of Westover hall, is a manticore (a half scorpion, lion, and human monster), and is suspicious of the two half-bloods' true identities, and therefore he was not fooled by Thalia's trick of the mist. She formulates a plan to distract Dr. Thorn; however, the plan backfires on them. Percy, who is forced to dance to blend in with the crowd, sees Dr. Thorn attempting to sneak away with the two half-bloods. He is unable to spot Thalia, Annabeth, or Grover in the crowd and so follows Dr. Thorn.

As he nears Bianca and Nico, Dr. Thorn throws a thorn and it grazes his shoulder. Percy realizes that poison has entered his system. Percy is too weak to fight and instead, listens to the manticore as he talks about The Great Stirring. Percy tries to reassure Bianca who is panicking and Nico who is both overjoyed and scared. Percy lets Dr. Thorn bring them to a cliff and they wait for the Manticore's allies to collect them. Percy tries hard to send a message to Grover that he was in danger. It works and soon Grover, Thalia, and Annabeth show up and Dr. Thorn reveals his true form as a manticore.

Hunters of Artemis campsite GN
Suddenly, some silver arrows pass Percy and hit the Manticore. Thorn retaliates and shoots a volley of thorns to the shooters and more silver arrows come out and split them perfectly in half. The archers get out of the bushes. They are all adolescent girls wearing silver clothing. Thalia introduces them as the Hunters of Artemis. They are about to shoot when Dr. Thorn lunges at Percy and Thalia, knowing they are both weak and stunned. Annabeth climbs on Dr. Thorn with her knife, but the hunters release their arrows, and he falls from the cliff, taking Annabeth with him as she leaves her Yankee's cap behind.

Artemis appears and orders the Hunters to set up camp. Percy is invited to come and have a talk with the goddess, who appears in the form of a girl around the age of twelve. She asks Percy to restate what Dr. Thorn mentioned and concludes that dangerous times are near. She decides to hunt a powerful monster, one that has the power to bring down the gods and Olympus. Before she goes alone to do so, Zoë Nightshade, her lieutenant, is placed in charge of the Hunters and is told to stay at Camp Half-Blood until Artemis returns. During their short stay at the outskirts of Westover Hall, Bianca chooses to join the Hunters and attain immortality and a new family, along with forswearing romantic love forever, while leaving Nico in the trust of those at Camp Half-Blood.

The group receives a ride from Artemis's brother Apollo who lets them use the sun chariot, with Thalia at the wheel. The combination results in a gut-wrenching experience for the group because Thalia is scared of heights and the sun chariot can fly. Soon, they arrive at Camp Half-Blood, almost crashing in the canoe lake.

Percy's Latest Dreams
Percy and Thalia lead Nico to the Big House for a conversation with Mr. D and Chiron. The two are quickly forbidden to carry out any rescue plans they have for Annabeth, with Dionysus stating that there is a small chance that she would survive. Chiron announces that a "friendly" game of Capture the Flag is going to be held against the Hunters, as it is a tradition at Camp Half-Blood. Percy returns to his cabin to learn that his father has installed a fountain for him, filled with golden drachmas to remind him to keep in touch with his family. Percy sends an Iris message to Tyson, only to learn that the Princess Andromeda is being protected by old spirits and that it was headed to the Panama Canal.

Percy soon has a dream in which Luke Castellan tricks Annabeth into holding up a ceiling of a cavern. He later learns that the ceiling is actually the sky and that Annabeth has actually taken over the former burden of Atlas. Percy tells Grover of his dream, only to learn of the possibility that Annabeth was considering joining the Hunters of Artemis. Percy attempts to seek help from the Oracle, but the Oracle does not respond. Later, after a humiliating defeat in Capture the Flag by the Hunters, Percy and Thalia are about to come to arms when Percy sees the Oracle walking towards Zoë. It was astounding as, according to Chiron, the Oracle never left the attic of the Big House.

A discussion is held about who is to go on the quest. It is decided that Zoë, Thalia, Bianca, Grover, and Phoebe would go, leaving Percy protesting. When asked whether his determination was due to his desperation to rescue Annabeth, Percy hesitates. In the end, the decision is final and there is nothing he could do to change it. Chiron tries to comfort him. Percy then sends an Iris message to his mother and finds her chatting with Paul Blofis, her new boyfriend. Before the connection is cut, Sally encourages Percy to do what he thinks is right.

Later, Percy has another dream, in which Artemis takes Annabeth's place holding the sky to save her from likely death. In the dream, the General tells Luke to kill Annabeth, but Luke convinces the General to let him keep her alive until the winter solstice, as further bait. Percy awakens to find Blackjack, a pegasus, as the latter asks him to rescue a marine cow-like creature called the Ophiotaurus. Percy names the creature Bessie, not knowing what it is, thinking it is a girl, and not knowing its true power.

Upon his return, Percy finds Nico eavesdropping on the Hunters. Using Annabeth's Yankees cap, he turns himself invisible and learns that Phoebe is bedridden due to a prank the Stoll brothers pulled. He quickly stops Nico, who is attempting to follow his sister on the quest (which Percy figures out after the conversation between the Hunters). Percy promises Nico that he would try to protect Bianca, before taking off on Blackjack and following the group.

